>> Chris: My name is Chris Parker I work
actually on the iPhone Frameworks Team right now
and we'll be talking a little bit about taking all of
the skills that you've learned as an iPhone developer
and applying them to programming on the Mac for the desktop.
How many of you have actually done some
Mac programming on the desktop before?
Cool, so like 25% or so that's% a great
number thanks for getting started.
We're going to talk a little bit, you know, basically you
spend a bunch of time trying to get your application to fit
on an iPhone, a little tiny device, memory constrained,
it has some UI constraints based on the screen shape
and the screen size and you're going to move up
to programming on the Macintosh and Mac, you know,
has up to 8 cores, it's got 30 inch displays hooked
up to it and there are a lot of different things
that inform the UI framework about dealing
with larger screens and things like that.
And just, also, the event models are different and there
are some gotchas and we're going to cover a lot of those.
Some of the things that should be very, very familiar to you
already, for instance, these guys the square brackets right,
if you're new to programming for the
iPhone you suddenly realize these weren't
for array dereferencing anymore
these are the square brackets
for Objective-C message sense it's
the same language on both platforms.
All of the tools that you already use to build your iPhone
applications, so Xcode for managing your projects resources
and all of its code and building and debugging
within Xcode, all of that's pretty much the same.
Interface Builder has -- not only does it have all the
iPhone UI elements built into it and all the UI smarts
to be able to build interfaces via drag and drop
it has all of that stuff for the AppKit as well
on the Cocoa side of things on a desktop.
And Instruments, basically, the same program,
you know, so the workflow for building your code
and developing your interface and instrumenting your
code and figuring out how everything works and seeing
where your performance problems are all of that workflow
is basically all the same, so you're already very familiar
with how to build up an application on the Macintosh.
You heard Bertrand talk about sort of
the core layering that we use and, you know, there's Core OS
and Core Services and the Media Frameworks and things like
that and on the iPhone Cocoa Touch is made up of UIKit
in the Foundation and a number of other frameworks
and pretty much that diagram stays the same for Cocoa.
There's a Cocoa umbrella framework that your
applications will link against for the most part
that by default contains AppKit, Foundation and Core Data
and, you know, if you're using Core Data on both the iPhone
and desktop that's a great opportunity here now in 3.0.
Some common things that are frameworks to both the desktop
and the iPhone the Address Book framework is pretty much
the same so that API is available in both places for dealing
with your user's contact information that they have for all
the people that they've met and put into their address book.
The Security framework is the same so just like on the
iPhone if you're handling user's passwords and things
like that you want to store those securely in the Keychain
so they're encrypted the Macintosh has
the Security APIs available to you.
Core Foundation and Foundation are both
available in both places so if your model objects
and a lot of your business logic are going to be written
as Foundation based objects, NSObject descended classes all
of that code you'll be able to largely
reuse probably without modification.
CFNetwork is also available so if you've been doing
custom network loading with, you know, the CF HTTP,
APIs things like that, that API
is also available on the desktop.
The System Configuration on the desktop, the framework there
is a little bit different than the one that's on the iPhone.
The iPhone has a very small set of APIs the System
Configuration framework on the desktop contains many
of the things that you would normally find in
a UI device and it also contains information
about how many network interfaces the computer has and all
the things that can be plugged into the machine as they come
and go there are rich APIs for determining the
state of a computer in System Configuration.
All of the Core Audio APIs are there
for the most part they're all available
so if you're doing custom Core Audio filters or
writing your own audio processing code you'll be able
to use a lot of that on the desktop as well.
Quartz is available in both places
so if you're familiar with using some
of the Core Graphics APIs you'll be
able to use those in both places.
New in iPhone OS 3.0 Core Data is
available on the phone so if you're going
to be using a framework Core Data's been available for a
long time on the desktop and now it's available on the phone
so if you're going to be running your app on 3.0 and Snow
Leopard you'll be able to share a lot of code there as well.
And moving from the phone the other way to the
desktop is Core Location so if you have an application
that uses some location-based services on the iPhone, Snow
Leopard contains a version of the Core Location framework
so you'll be able to use some of that code as well so you
can have a location aware desktop Macintosh application.
It doesn't just say your desk is here, by the
way, you know, if you have a laptop it tracks you.
Mac feature availabilities some things are
available only on the desktop or only on the iPhone
but some of the big hitters here the
Macintosh supports Garbage Collection,
so we have an automated Garbage Collector on the
desktop it's an optional thing you can choose
to compile your application with Garbage Collection
turned on and for those when Garbage Collection is
on retain, release and autorelease become no-ops.
Alright, so we basically sort of swallow those and
we track the lifetime of the object by tracking
where it gets assigned and we keep track
of all those write barriers and make sure
that there's a reference to all of those pointers.
And then a collector thread comes along and it cleans up
any unreferenced memory so you can use Garbage Collection
on the desktop if you want but
it's not available on the iPhone.
And the Blocks Language Construct, you know, you
heard Bertrand and Bud and some of those guys talk
about Grand Central Dispatch and blocks and this
new language construct those aren't available
on the iPhone but they are available on the desktop.
Some of the API that only takes blocks on the desktop
won't be available on the iPhone those are all guarded
by these availability macros and so you'll see things
like Foundation uses the IF NS blocks available,
# IF to be able to keep that code from appearing and you'll
frequently see IF Target OS Mac and not Target OS iPhone
and that's your guide to be able to read the
headers and figure out what API is available
on the desktop only and what APIs available in both places.
Generally if something's not decorated
it's available in both places.
We make a big deal in all of our documentation and
in a lot of our sample code and things like that
of writing the Model View Controller paradigm, so if
you've been writing your UIViews and you've got a lot
of Model code underneath and the Controllers mediate
between those 2 a lot of your Model code is really going
to be completely reusable so you should be able
to take most of that View code and rewrite that
but keep all of your Model logic the same.
So let's talk a little bit about
Views and Windows and Events.
In the AppKit on the desktop NSView is the base class for
views and UIView is the base class for all UIViews in UIKit.
They both are responsible for receiving and handling
events so when you construct your subview tree,
the views take care of figuring out where the event happened
and sending the events up the responder chain appropriately
but this is where a lot of that machinery starts.
They're both responsible for drawing so
there's a draw rect method and you can draw
when you get the draw rect message
but they're both set up for drawing.
There are some differences though one of them
is UIView's origin is 00 in the upper left
so when you're holding the device the origin
is up here in the upper left-hand corner.
NSView's origin is actually in the lower
left and that's just a heritage of the AppKit
but it has some rendering benefits
depending on which direction you're drawing.
UIViews always have layers so if you've been doing
iPhone programming for a while you're familiar
with the idea of how the layer-backed drawing works.
UIViews always have a layer NSViews opt into a layer so the
drawing model in the AppKit is a little bit different due
to where the backing store is owned for drawing.
And in UIView subviews can draw outside the view bounds
optionally a UIView you can put subviews into a view
and the bounds of those views extend outside of
the superview's bounds and they'll actually draw
out there unless you say Set Clips to Bounds, Yes.
NSView's subviews always get clipped to the view bounds,
so if you've been taking advantage of that feature
in UIView you won't be able to do that in NSView.
So here's the example of the origin, the origin in the
UIView is in the upper left, NSView is in the lower left
but there are times where that may
not necessarily be what you want.
On the desktop the View class has this
idea of whether or not it's flipped
so this is the default implementation
for isFlipped for NSView.
If you override this in your custom
NSView subclass to say isFlipped, Yes,
the origin slides up to the upper left, right?
Some views in the AppKit are flipped by default
some views are not but the base class is flipped,
is returning No so the origin is in the lower left.
A bunch of NSView classes so NSButton, ScrollView,
SplitView, TabView and TableView are all flipped by default
so their origins are all in the upper left
and that has to do with being, you know,
a table view generally draws from the upper left down.
Some views will actually allow control over this
flipped concept based on what the current context is
or they have API for it so NSImage, for
instance, will figure out whether it's drawing
into a flipped view and draw appropriately.
NSTextView and NSFont the text system figures
out whether or not you're in a flipped view
and draws also appropriately and, you know, ClipView
and things like that also take this into account.
So there's a lot of documentation over what's flipped and
what isn't, so sometimes you'll see something and you'll go,
oh, it's drawing down here and I want it to draw up
here, oh, well, it's a flipped view so I have to take
that into account so you can find out whether
or not views are flipped with the UseFlip API.
Oh look it's this session.
Here's basically a Keynote window and we could kind of
explode this to think about how the views are laid out,
and we collapsed the actual Keynote decorations into one
view but notionally that's a whole lot of views there.
But the idea here is for a set of NSViews
is that we render those NSViews in Z order
to a backing store that's owned by the window.
Right, so remember when I was talking earlier about UIViews
each having a layer and, you know, you've got a whole bunch
of views in there and if you update a view in
the middle of that just that view gets updated,
none of the other UIViews get updated because the
rendering tree just composites all of that together.
In the AppKit when you add something to a scene like
say, for instance, we Photoshopped this person in there
and we want to draw that into an already existing view
sub-hierarchy, basically, what we have to do is figure
out where that rectangle appears and for every view that's
in the hierarchy, basically, tell that view that it has
to invalidate itself in that rectangle and then
render that whole backing store to the back again.
The AppKit is very fast at this, there's a lot
of horsepower to throw at this kind of rendering
so we can render all the way back to a backing
store that's owned by the window and this works
out to be a big memory performance win for us.
You can, however, opt NSViews into what's called
Layer-Backed Mode, so rather than having this backing store
that renders all the way back to the NSWindow if you
call setWantsLayer and pass it Yes what happens is all
of the subviews get layers and now the invalidation model
and the rendering model is pretty
much the same as UIView, right?
Rather than rendering all the way back to a
backing store each view draws into its layer
and then those layers are composited and when you move those
around none of those views are getting redraw commands.
When should you opt in?
You want to opt in really if you want to
reduce redraw to make your animation smoother,
so every time 2 views would intersect in the NSView
drawing model, you know, there's an increasing number
of pixels you have to draw and then it
decreases when the views stop overlapping.
You can opt into it in order to
reduce some of that draw noise
because the compositing engine takes care of it for you.
You also need to opt in if you're going to use
CAFilters to basically decorate your views,
so if you're going to put shadows on the views or
do any of those other neat effects that you see
in the Core Image Funhouse app or something like that.
The CAFilters are all -- you'll need to use
Layer-Backed views in order to use CAFilters.
The flip side to when do you opt in is when don't
you opt in and the answer's most of the time,
most of your drawing is gonna happen
in your NSView subclasses.
Draw methods and the AppKit is very fast at pushing
all of those bits all the way back to the backing store
for the window so you're not really gonna need
Layer-Backed NSViews all the time and it does amount
to somewhat of a performance win to not use it.
So what we recommend is if you are going to
use it turn it on, use it, do your animation,
schedule all of your behaviors and then turn it off again.
Right, so you can dynamically opt views in and out of
the Layer-Backed views but this makes it a lot easier
to do some of your drawing a lot faster too.
UIWindow and NSWindow, so, again, there's
another set of parallel classes here and UIKit,
UIWindow is basically a container for views.
In the AppKit NSWindow is the container
for views that's very similar.
In UIKit, UIWindow inherits from UIView, but in the AppKit
NSWindow inherits directly from NSResponder so NSWindow
and NSView are actually peer classes in terms of their
hierarchies; this changes a little bit the things
that you can do with an NSWindow versus with a UIWindow.
With the UIWindow there's no user manipulation, there are
no controls on the UIWindow when UIKit creates one for you
to resize the window or to close it or anything like that.
In NSWindow we allow user manipulation
of the window directly,
so NSWindows can be resized we have the Resize control
on the lower right or they can be closed or minimized
or maximized via the controls in the upper left, so all
of those things are things that you can do in NSWindow
that you can't do with the UIWindow and it changes
a little bit some of the things about drawing.
UIWindows are always screen sized, when UIWindow comes up
out of a NIB when we create one for you it's always 320
by 480, it's always the same size it's always full screen.
When you create one programmatically
all of our documentation tells you,
you make it full screen, so that's 320 by 480.
NSWindows can be any size programmatically or if the user
resizes them and the users resize windows all the time,
you've got 15 windows you're probably doing it on Xcode
all the time too, you know, you've got a whole bunch
of windows open, you're moving things around,
you're shrinking things, you're expanding things,
you're trying to make your work environment more comfortable
and that also informs how we do NSWindow work in the AppKit.
Also, UIWindow you pretty much get 1 in most UIKit apps.
I mean, you can use UIWindows as containers
for other things and shift them back and forth
but usually there's pretty much 1 window.
In NSWindow you can have many windows
in a single application.
Also, for event handling, there are some
similarities between the 2 event mechanisms as well.
There we go.
UIEvents and NSEvents both contain information about
input actions so they're both going to tell you everything
about what happens as the user
interacts with your application.
UIEvents contain UITouch objects pretty much or in actually
iPhone OS 3.0 they might tell you about a motion event
that happened as well but those pretty much are just about
all of the events that happen as the user touches the glass
and puts their fingers on the glass to do gestures.
And NSEvents encapsulates all kinds of different events,
there, you know, not only does your user have a track pad
on their laptop but they'll have keyboards and
mice hooked up they'll have tablets with a pen
and the pen might produce proximity events as it gets
close to the tablet, so all of those events are things
that you can find out about from NSEvent and it covers
all of those input devices that basically can be plugged
into the user's computer; so this is a far richer
set of events that you have access to the NSEvent.
UIEvents are persistent through a sequence so, you
know, as an event happens and as the user touches
on the screen those touches build up into a single UIEvent
and that UIEvent is the same event object the whole time.
In NSEvent in the AppKit every time you get one of these
new things happening like a proximity event or a touch
or a key down or any of those things that's a new object
for each event and those new objects are immutable,
you cannot edit those objects they are just
stand-alone value objects that tell you what happened.
And UIEvents, you know, you can cancel UIEvents,
things happen and the state changes or the phone rings
or something happens and those touches can be cancelled
and in the AppKit pretty much you don't get interrupted
by phone calls on your computer very much those mouse
events and those other events can't be cancelled
so you can choose not to handle them
but you're not going to get API access
to just say OK, we'll pretend this never happened.
There's also some touch support in the AppKit.
Alright, UITouch and NSTouch both track information about
touch events so everything that's happening on the track pad
on recent MacBook Pro models the AppKit can
find out about those via the NSTouch class.
UITouch deals with an integrated sensor; the
phone has an integrated glass sensor on the front
that when the user touches it the place that they're
touching is the actual coordinates in the screen.
NSTouch you're sort of one step removed from it it
deals with opaque sensors so the track-pad, you know,
you make a gesture here but you're not actually
touching anything on the screen so the focus goes
to either the responder or it may
go to where the mouse cursor is,
so there's a little sort of step
removed in dealing with that.
Raleigh Ledet who is the Mr. Events
Wizard for the AppKit will be giving the User Events
in Cocoa talk tomorrow -- wait
-- I hope tomorrow's Wednesday --
tomorrow in Knob Hill at 3:30 so if you do want
to learn more about handling events directly
on the desktop definitely go see Rolly
he'll give a great talk on user events.
So let's talk a little bit about controls now.
I promise this isn't all just me droning on up here about
the differences it gets a little more interesting later.
UIControl and NSControl, these are
both the base class for control.
So remember a control is something you tap on it
or something happens and it sends an action, right?
They both send actions when directed but UIControls
you can have many actions each of which has a target
and in NSControl you pretty much have 1 action and 1 target.
And there are basically 3 forms of
the action selector you can have.
In UIKit there's 1 that's just an action that gets
sent, there's 1 that tells you the sender of the action
and then there's action forEvent
which is the sender and the UIEvent
so you can do some multiplexing
based on what events came in.
And in Interface Builder when you click
on a control, in this case a UI button
there are all these different events having to do with
touch-drag and touch-entered and exited and things like that
where you can find out about all these
things, and not only do you find out about all
of these things you can send each one of those actions
to a different receiver, so many actions, many receivers.
NSControl, this is the only action selector you get so
you get one that says, this is the action and who sent it.
That action can be key-down, key-up, things like that.
This is what it looks like in Interface Builder.
The one exception to this in terms of getting more
than one action, NSTableView has a double action
so when the user double-clicks on a non-editable
portion of a table view like a non-editable table cell
or table column you'll get a double action and you'll
get an opportunity to handle that event as well
so you can double-click on something
and it will tell you whether or not,
you know, you'll get an action for a double-click.
So when you're writing a Macintosh application
typically, you know, remember what happens in the UIKit,
a lot of your applications are database driven or
table-driven the table view looks like this you tap
on the table view and you get basically a zoomed in or
a detailed view of the data that represents that row
that you've clicked on or that you tapped on -- I'm sorry.
On a Macintosh, you know, there are a lot of
document-based applications and the user creates things
with Text Edit they create things with Keynote they have
pictures that they've created with different applications
or that they've pulled off of their phones or their cameras
and they can save these documents anyplace and there's a lot
of support directly in the AppKit for document-based
applications, and the main class that takes care of a lot
of this is the NSDocument class and then
the NSDocument controller mechanisms.
And document-based apps basically the NSDocument
helps you out with the reading and writing of data,
it helps you out with atomic saves and some simple
scripting stuff that's built into the AppKit and OS X.
The atomic saves thing is really a big deal.
When you're handling user's data you don't ever want
to lose the user's work, so when we save what we tend
to do is we save in a location and then rename that save
over the old location and NSDocument takes care of a lot
of the mechanics of that atomic saving for
you so that if something does go wrong.
If everything goes right you save the document, the
user's happy, you're happy, everything works great.
If something goes wrong like the user doesn't have write
access someplace or the file system's gone south on them
or they've lost contact with a file server.
If we save -- if something goes wrong there we want either
the old version or the new version to appear on disk
but we still want the user to be able to save someplace
else with the version that they have in memory,
and NSDocument helps out a lot
with those mechanisms as well.
To show us a little bit about how all this
works I'm going to ask Kevin Perry to come up.
Kevin works on the Cocoa Frameworks Team and he has some
demos on just creating a document-based app right in Xcode.
>> Kevin: Thank you, so here we are in Xcode and we're
just going to start off by creating a new Cocoa application
that is document-based and we will just call it Demo App
for this demo and we're just going to start off building
and running it to show you just how much and how
quickly you can build your own applications in Cocoa.
Cocoa really makes the simple things and common things
that you do in your applications very simple to do
and you can focus on the more complicated
and more interesting things in your own work.
So here we have our demo app running and we see an empty
document window up here, there's not really much there but,
you know, hey, we have a document window and we can create
more document windows and close them and we can bring
up a Save Panel here and attempt to save,
you know, we haven't implemented saving yet
but not only do we have the Save Panel we have proper
error reporting when the save does not work properly
and we have Open Panel as well and we properly can't open
anything here because we haven't implemented that yet.
So that's a lot of behaviors that you can
get for free right out of the box with Cocoa.
All these behaviors, for the most part, are
handled by NSDocuments, NSDocument Controller
and NSWindow Controller various classes in AppKit and
for the most part you'll just use these classes straight
out of the box they will work for you
and do what you need for the most part.
But in those rare cases where you need to
have custom behaviors you can, of course,
subclass those classes and provide your own implementation.
So we'll go back to Chris for a little
bit more about NSDocument we'll build off
of this in later demos but for now back to him.
>> Chris: Thank you sir.
So, absolutely no code in that, go to Xcode,
Create a New, document-based application
and pretty much you're already getting a number of default
behaviors out of it, you know, so the windows get staggered,
the untitled stuff appears, Cocoa really helps you out with
a lot of the basic stuff so you can concentrate on your app.
If you're going to override things you need to actually get
data in and out of the disk, so NSDocument has some APIs
for reading your document, read from URL of type
error and this is a pattern that you see a lot
in Cocoa you saw it in CocoaTouch probably a little bit.
The NSError contains anything where we think that something
can go wrong we'll try to give you an NSError return
and that NSError will always contain basically if it's
in the Cocoa domain it'll always contain something
that's suitable for presentation to the user,
and if we've done our job right that means that you'd
probably never have to see Error-43 again or anything
like that, really obscure error
messages that don't help the user out.
The other one is Read From File Wrapper of Type Error.
An NSFile wrapper is a class that basically
encapsulates it abstracts out a hierarchy of objects
and that hierarchy can wind up being written out
to disk as a directory structure or you can flatten
in NSData there's a lot of flexibility
with an NSFile wrapper for editing documents
and we'll take advantage of that in a minute.
And a Read From Data of Type Error, if for somehow in
your application you got an NSData that you want to turn
into a full NSDocument in an instance
you can do that with this method here.
The other half is writing stuff out,
being able to write to URL of Type Error.
You can get a file wrapper of the types of the NSDocument
if you produce an NSFile wrapper this is how you'd
get the NSFile Wrapper Instance out of that document
and Data of Type Error so there are a symmetric set of APIs.
There are some other things that Kevin's
going to show you now in actually filling
in that document-based application
to actually save things out.
>> Kevin: Alright, so we are going to now build off of
this empty project and build a very basic RTFD Editor.
RTFD is a file type related to RTF
or Rich Text Format that also allows
for embedding various arbitrary files such as images.
So at the end of this demo we're going to have a simple
but powerful rich text editor that supports image embedding
and will have full save and load behavior.
So we'll start off we'll show you how easy it is to
enable Garbage Collection we'll use that for this demo
because that will just simplify things for our purposes.
So here we find the Garbage Collection setting
and we just set that to Required -- close that --
and now we're going to go in and
start developing our interface.
Here we see this familiar empty window that represents
our document contents, so we're going to come over here
to the Interface Builder Library, which you should be
familiar with if you've made applications for the iPhone,
of course, and we're dragging in here in NSTextView
and you see here that we've got a scroll-view already
that this text-view is embedded in so that's something
that Interface Builder sets up for you automatically.
We're going to set this to size to fit to the window.
Now, we want to make sure that this text-view remains
the same size as the window so we come in here
to the Size Inspector and enable these auto-resizing flags.
You see here a little preview of that and we can
Command-click here in Interface Builder and see that live.
So now we're going to click here, drill down to
our NSTextView and go to its Attributes Inspector.
And you see there are a lot of various
features that you can enable or disable
on NSTextView with the click of a check box.
NSTextView is really one of the gems of
Cocoa you'll find it in most applications.
Just because there are so many features that you can get for
free that are common and expected now on Mac applications.
There's things like Rich Text, Undo, Redo, Graphics, Image
Editing, Non-Contiguous Layout which lets you display large,
very large documents very efficiently, Find
Panel, Font Panel, Rulers, and so forth,
but we're just going to enable graphics
here for now so we click this check box.
Now we need some way to let our documents talk to our
text-view and we need some interaction there so we're going
to come in here to the My Document header.
Make this monitor big.
And just as a disclaimer we're going
to take a little shortcut here,
normally you'd have a proper model view controller set
up for this but we're just going to connect our model,
which here is, in this case it's the document's
subclass straight up to our view, the text-view.
So we're going to create an IV outlet in NSTextView
like so, we'll come back here to Interface Builder
and here in the NIB the file's owner is what represents
our NSDocument Instance so we Control-drag here
from the files owner to the outlet and we
see here that there's our text-view outlet
that we just added so we connect it like so and we save.
Come back here to Xcode and go to the
implementation of our document class
and we'll implement saving and loading of our document now.
Here we see the data of type and read from
data methods that Chris pointed out earlier
and for most cases this would be a sufficient place to
implement this but since RTFD is actually a package type
or a bundle type we can't easily represent it
with just NSData we want to use an NSFile wrapper
so we're actually going to instead of overriding
these we're going to override write ToURL
of Type Error and here we'll implement this like so.
Here's our text-view we're grabbing its
text-storage and building an Attributes Dictionary
with the RTFD Text Document type
as the document type attribute.
Then we're asking the Text Storage to create
a file wrapper for us with the entire contents
of the file and the attributes that we have here.
And so that gives us back an RTFD file wrapper which we can
then tell it to write to disk and we're telling it to do
that atomically as well so we have some safe behavior there.
And we just return whether or not it succeeded.
Implementing document loading is just
as simple we override Companion Read
from URL Type of Error and we implement it like so.
Again, we're building a dictionary with the RTFD document
type and we're using NSAttributedString here instead
of NSFile Wrapper directly because NSAttributedString
already recognizes and understands when it sees an RTFD file
on disk it knows how to use NSFileWrapper
to load that document.
So here we've created the attributed string
and we return whether or not that succeeded.
At the point of document loading our interface
hasn't been instantiated and displayed to the user
yet that happens here in Window Controller Did Load NIB.
We get this notification after the NIB has loaded.
So we need somewhere to push this
attributed string into our text-view.
We need just a simple instance variable to hold on to that,
so here we call this NSAttributed
String an Attributed String.
And here in Window Controller Did Load NIB
if we have successfully created one we just take the
text-storage and set the attributed string on it.
Now that's all the code we need to write
for this application just 10 or 15 lines
of code here not very complicated, but there's one
more thing that we need to do to tell NSDocument
about the file types that we want
our application to understand.
So here we open up the application's
target window and go to the Properties tab.
Here we see a table of all the various document types that
our application understands and we're going to set the UTI
or the Uniform Type Identifier
to the proper con.apple.rtfd UTI.
Now the Uniform Type Identifier abstracts all
this information about file type extensions,
Mime types and OS types so we can actually delete all
those entries, but the last thing we need to do is tell it
that it has actually a package format not a flat file there.
So we'll go ahead and build and run again
and we will demonstrate this working.
So I'll start typing something here.
[ Silence ]
>> Kevin: And you see here the Close button as I've
typed now has this dot in the middle of it indicating
that the document's dirty and that there are unsafe changes
in there, and so when I try to click on that it informs me
of these unsafe changes and asks me if I want
to save them or not because they'll have undo,
redo as you saw that was one of the things that we left
enabled in our NSTextView and we also have, of course,
Rich Text Editing so we can change the font.
And you see, also, I have a little typo here and
this text-view has automatically found this typo
for me and I can correct it just like that.
All of this -- we haven't dealt with any of this code on
other platforms this could include a lot of extra work.
So now let's see Saving and Loading working we will
go to our documents here and save a document off.
It seems like it works let's -- it's the moment of truth
here we'll try and open it back up and there you go saving
and loading works just fine just 10 or 15
lines of code and you see how simple it is
to get started right away with
your own applications in Cocoa.
Back to Chris we'll find out more
about NSDocument a little bit
and other features that we'll add to this application next.
[ Applause ]
>> Chris: So, yeah, 10 lines of code and a whole bunch
of built-in behavior that's already provided for you
by the AppKit so there's a lot of features
there that you don't have to even worry about.
NSDocument also supplies a lot of other behaviors
as well, Autosaving, so if you're like me
and you're saving you have the Command S twitch on the
keyboard, you know, every few seconds you're always saving.
If you don't have that twitch you can configure your
documents to autosave automatically on an interval you set.
Alright, so you can save your users some trouble
if, you know, the power goes out or if, you know,
heaven forbid your app crashes something like they'll have
an autosave version of a fairly recent version of that data.
There's also some features in there that help
you print, so, you can have printers hooked
up to your computer as well NSDocument helps support that.
The Change Management with the little dot
and tracking whether or not it's dirty
or things like that and Error Presentation, right?
All of the sheets and things when something went wrong or
all of that is all built-in to the AppKit so you'll be able
to do some very rich behaviors
with pretty much no code at all.
One of the most intuitive ways to be able to interact with
things on the Macintosh, you know, you've been dragging,
dropping files to copy them in the Finder probably
since the day you opened up your Macintosh.
Drag and Drop is supported in the AppKit you generally
have a source-view and a destination-view right,
so you're dragging from one place to another and there's
an operation involved in the middle there alright
so the operation has to do with what it
means to drag from point A to point B.
The operations are pretty straightforward.
There are operations for Copy, Link, Move and, basically,
what you're doing here is telling
us exactly what will happen
when a drop occurs is it a copy is it a move what
do you support from the source side of the drag?
The only method you really have to implement in order
to get this is Dragging Source Operation Mask for Local
and the dragging source API here gives you an opportunity
for your custom view subclass to
return what operations you support.
The ForLocal part tells you whether or not this is a
drag within your application or whether it's a drag
to another application, so you find out whether or
not this is an intra or an inter-application drag.
The destination API there are a few other source
APIs about updating the images as they're dragged
and you can customize what all of that
looks like but these are the basics.
The destination API is interesting it's draggingEntered,
draggingUpdated, draggingExited, prepareForDragOperation,
perform and conclude and these are where in your destination
you can handle all the different events associated
with the drag.
And that sender's how you find out, you know, you can find
out what operations the sender supports and things like that
by querying that via the NSDragging Info protocol.
All of this stuff is pretty straightforward but there are
a lot of classes in the kit that implement higher-level API
to make it easier to deal with Drag and
Drop and we'll see that in a minute.
One of the things I didn't talk about in the earlier section
was table views and there are actually 2 classes UITableView
in the UIKit and NSTableView in the AppKit.
They both have very similar APIs one of them has a
delegate, they both, actually they both have delegates;
they both have datasources so that
API should be very familiar to you.
UITableView mainly because of the constraint of the size
of the screen, has many rows and pretty much 1 column
where you're just going through a
single column of information right?
NSTableView -- hey, you know, we have 30 inch
monitors hooked up to some of our computers
or 24 inch monitors it's a very wide experience and
so you can actually display many rows and many columns
so you get much more -- an actual
tabular interface in an NSTableView.
If you want you can set it to 1, you know many
rows in 1 column but it doesn't happen often.
UITableView deals in UITableView cells for individual items,
and NSTableView deals with objects and it fills in NSCells
for individual items so that the model for
what you're asked to provide as a datasource
of an NSTableView is a little different
than what we see with UITableView.
So remember what happens with UITableView,
you know, you've got your data model
and the first thing we'll do is we'll ask Number of
Sections in TableView, how many things are in there.
And then we'll turn around and we'll ask
for the number of rows in each section,
so for each of those sections we'll
find out how many rows they're in.
And then eventually you get asked to provide
as a return type its UITableView Cell,
TableView cell for Row at Index Path and you're actually
creating a view and filling that view in with the data
and then that view gets around it put
into the view sub-tree so if you look
at this you'll actually see views in there right?
UITableView cells are a full UIView subclass.
The AppKit does things a little bit differently partly
because you've just got so much data that you could do
if you wind up with 600,000 views that
kind of slows things down a little bit.
So instead NSTableView uses an approach
that involves a class called an NSCell
So the first thing we're going to do is we'll ask you number
of rows in table view, how many rows are in this table.
In this case what I have here is a datasource
of restaurants that I like and I'm going to try
and display them here in this table view.
The next think we do is we go to the table column
the table view goes to the table column and asks it
for a cell that's appropriate for the
type of data it's going to be displaying.
In this case we have an NSTextField cell and this cell,
basically, gets filled in when we call your datasource.
You'll get table view object value for table
column row and you'll notice that returns an ID,
that ID is the actual object that represents
that entry in the table column and row.
And the idea here is in this case it's an NSString
and we're going to fill out that cell in the NSString
and then we're going to take a snapshot of that cell
with the NSString in it and we're going to display that,
we're going to stamp it into the
position into the NSTableView.
And then we're going to do that for
every single item in that column, right?
It happens a lot faster than this.
So the next thing we do is now we're going to
go, in this case, the table column parameter
that you were getting called with for each of those
things was the Restaurant column now what we're going
to do is we're going to go and get a cell for
the next column which is the Rating column.
And in this case what I did at Interface Builder
was dragged out what's called a Level Indicator cell
and we provide a number of these
cells built-in to the AppKit.
The Level Indicator is a thing that's basically a discrete
or continuous display for either levels or capacity,
things like that and you can set a
bunch of different parameters on.
In this case I had it set to what's
called Rating Mode and that's a fancy name
for drawing how many stars appears in here.
So I've assigned ratings to each of these
restaurants and now what happens is we'll return the 3
or the 4, the NS number that represents it.
When that hits that cell it's going to get
reformatted every time table view object value
for table column row gets called and that's going to
get filled in with the various pictures of the stars.
Alright, and if I don't give my work cafeteria
and my mother's cooking the same rating
I'm in a lot of trouble in both places.
So this is what it looks like when it's all filled in
right, and this use of NS cells allows us to be able
to display just really wide, really large amounts of data
very, very quickly because what we don't have are a lot
of heavyweight NSViews sitting in that table.
So here are a bunch of the different cells there
are, you know, comma box cells, check boxes,
pop-ups so a lot of the common things that you would put
in tables, you know, Boolean values might be represented
by check boxes, things like that, these are all built-in.
There's a custom cell class so if you
write your own you can still drag them
out in Interface Builder to assign them in the table view.
Kevin's going to show you just how easy it is
to use NSTableView as part of this RTFD Editor.
>> Kevin: So we're going to return to our RTFD
Editor application here we're going to enhance it
with an Image Library so that we can put our images
directly from our application into our documents,
and so we're going to use NSTableView
to demonstrate how to do this.
So let's start off by creating a new controller class
subclass of NSObject we'll call it Image Library Controller
and it will be responsible for populating our table view.
So we have it implement here the NSTableView DataSource
Protocol and we will now go over to our main menu --
close this NIB here -- our main menu NIB and we'll
instantiate the Image Library Controller here.
So we find a custom object, drag that out and
change its class to Image Library Controller.
And now we need some place to put our table view that we'll
have so we grab a panel, which is a special type of window.
Now, since this is a garbage collected application we need
to make sure that there are references to these objects
so that they don't -- they're not collected
by the background collector thread.
So what we'll do here is we'll just add an NSPanel IB outlet
called Panel and connect that -- semi-colon -- thank you --
connect that like so and we'll make the Image
Library Controller the delegate of our application.
Another disclaimer this is just a shortcut for demo purposes
you'll have in your own applications window controllers
and view controllers and so forth to
manage the lifetime of these objects.
So now that we have our window here
we will finally create our table view.
We will do the same thing we did before with the text-view,
again, it's already embedded in a scroll-view and we want
that to auto-resize like so in the window and
we'll click the Drill Down to our table view.
Now since this is going to be an image library we're
going to be containing displaying images a row height
of 17 isn't going to be sufficient so
we'll go ahead and bump that up to say 100.
And in the attributes we will make
this a single column with no headers.
We also need to connect this to our Image Library Controller
and now here you see the datasource outlet
which is what we want to connect to.
So by default you see Interface Builder
creates an NSTableView with a text-cell.
We want an image cell, obviously,
so we just drag that right in
and here you see a good representative example
of what our table view would look like.
So now we have dropped an NSImage Cell in this column.
The datasource methods are going to expect an NSImage
to be returned instead of, for example, an NSString.
So now we'll go ahead and save that.
That's all we need to do for our interface.
So now we have our controller object here,
we have our view set-up, we need now a model.
We're just going to have a simple NSMutable Array for now
and call it Images, and now we'll come to the implementation
of our Image Library Controller and in the init method
we will populate that array, here we're creating it
and we're enumerating the contents of a particular
directory here on our desktop and for each file
in that directory we're attempting
to create an NSImage with it.
If that's succeeded we'll add it
to our array, pretty simple.
But now we need to give these images to the table view
and we do that by implementing the 2 NSTableView
datasource methods that Chris already talked about.
So the first is number of rows in table view, well this is
really simple we just return images count we have X number
of images we want X number of rows in our table view.
And the next one is TableView ObjectValue for Table
Column and Row and we return just images objects at index
with the given row we just have a single table
column so we can ignore that parameter there.
So let's go ahead and run and here you see
a bunch of images in our library already.
Just, again, a few lines of code and we have
created a fully working table view datasource.
But currently we can't really make it do
anything we need some way to get these images
from the table view into our document here.
Chris also talked about drag and drop that's
probably the most intuitive user interface for this
so we'll show you just how easy this is to implement with
NSTableView, which abstracts a lot of the dragging source
and destination -- or the dragging
source API that you have to implement.
So back here in our Image Library Controller we will
override table view write rows with indexes to Pasteboard.
So here we have to -- we're supposed
to write our selected image
to the pasteboard so it can be read at the destination.
And so the first thing we do is we take the keyboard,
the NSPasteboard parameter that we're given here
and clear its contents so we have
a clean slate to start out at.
And then we tell it to write objects and give it NSArray
with a single object which is the image at the first
and only index in this row indexes index set like so.
Now write objects returns Yes or No for success
and we need to do the same, as you can see here,
from this datasource method so we return what it returns.
We build and run, once again, and you can see that drag and
drop is just that simple it's a 2 line implementation here
in our datasource and we have fully
working drag and drop into our NSTextView.
So another testament to the power
of Cocoa and ease of use there.
Back to Chris for more.
[ Applause ]
>> Chris: So, you know, both table view and the text-view
implement a lot of the dragging methods for you so,
you know, you notice when you drag on the table and in the
text-view the insertion point moves around to represent
where in the text those images are going to be dragged
-- dropped rather, so there's a lot of built-in behavior,
again, that you're getting for the
kit absolutely free at no cost to you.
Another interface that we use a lot is in the Finder this
is just a search window there's nothing in it right now
but when you type up in that search
field, you know, Spotlight goes through
and it uses the indexing information that's stored on your
hard drive, on your user's hard drives and returns results
in there it puts the document icons into the search window
to find out what meets that criteria and that's all based
on the Spotlight APIs that are in
Foundation and in MetaDataQuery Framework.
But the Foundation versions of these classes
are NSMetaDataQuery and NSMetaDataItem,
so these are basically the way that you can programmatically
be a client of the search APIs in your application right?
Remember you user can save stuff any place in the file
system so they may have trouble finding things occasionally
or you may have trouble finding things or you may want to
find things for them and Kevin's going to show you this
in a minute but the main class is NSMetaDataQuery.
You program a query by giving it a predicate
basically as something that evaluates to true
or false that defines the criteria that you want
to use for the search and it supports grouping,
which is really interesting, so you can group by type.
It's an asynchronous API right because, you know,,
you've got 320G hard drives, 500G hard drives,
terabytes worth of information in places.
So the search starts and then it has to crawl through
the index and find out where all that stuff is.
There's a delegate API that calls
back and says, hey, I have results.
What those results are NSMetaDataItems and those
items are not actually the files themselves
but there's a lot of information about those files.
Things like when it was last opened, when it was
last moved, the contents changed, the, you know,
where it came from that kind of things, a lot of
information in there including the path to the file itself.
But, again, it's not the file itself.
There are also some nifty features about
NSMetaDataQuery that make it very easy to program with
and it'll actually let us get rid of some code,
so Kevin's got an example of that as well.
>> Kevin: Alright, so we'll return here to this init
method where we have populated our array of images.
Now, if your user wants to be able to find images
in, for example, various locations on the file system
or images with particular properties or other meta-data
about the images you would have to do a lot of work
on this it would get a lot more complicated
very quickly but we can use NSMetaDataQuery,
use Spotlight to make that a very simple thing to implement.
So we're going to come back here to the header
or our Image Library Controller and we're going
to swap out the array for an MSMetaDataQuery.
We're actually going to add, right now, over here,
a property for it for reasons you'll see shortly.
And we'll need to synthesize that here as well.
[ Silence ]
>> Kevin: Alright, so now we can actually delete
all of this code and we'll replace it with this.
We're simply instantiating an NSMetaDataQuery
and we just set a predicate
which will tell the query which
kinds of files we want to match.
In this case we are finding any files
whose content type matches image,
so any image types that the system recognizes will match.
But we'll limit the search scopes to the single
directory that we were searching before for this demo,
and then we start the query to start getting the results.
So NSMetaDataQuery has a results method that you can
call to get an array of all of the files that it finds.
But this results array actually contains instances
of NSMetaDataItem which is a wrapper class around all
of the meta-data that you might be interested
in about the files that Spotlight finds.
For this we want not the meta-data on the files
we want the actual data so we actually want a way
to replace the contents of this results array which we can
do fairly simply with NSMetaDataQuery and its delegate API.
So we will here declare conformance to the
NSMetaDataQuery delegate protocol and set ourselves here
as the delegate of the query and then we implement --
[ Background noise ]
>> Kevin: Did I not save that?
There we go -- MetaDataQuery Replacement Object for
Result Object, so the parameter here is the NSMetaDataItem
and we want to instead return an NSImage which
we initialize with the contents of the file
that that NSMetaDataItem represents and you can
get that file path by calling Value for Attributes
and passing KMD Item Path, which is the
Spotlight's constant for that meta-data information.
And there we go we've created an
NSImage and now that will be put
into the queries results array
instead of the NSMetaDataItem.
So one of the great things that Chris was alluding
to about NSMetaDataItem is that it supports bindings.
The Results Array will be updated automatically when the
file system changes or when Spotlight finds additional files
that match the predicate and the Results Array is
specially designed for binding so that when connected
with the proper bindings-aware controller all
that information can be pushed very easily
to your views without any additional code.
And we can actually replace bindings, we
can replace the NSTableView datasource code
with bindings here so we can actually delete all of this.
We did reference the old images array right here
so we'll just very quickly replace
that with the results of the query.
But now we'll go to Interface Builder
again where we can set up the bindings.
Here we see the multitude of Cocoa bindings-aware
controllers that you can use in Cocoa.
There's Object Controllers and Tree Controllers
and Dictionary Controllers and so forth.
We want an Array Controller since our results
property is an array, so here we've instantiated it
and we bind it its contents array here, we find the
Image Library Controller there and since we've made it
as the MetaDataQuery and app property we can very easily
access it with a key-path such as this query.results.
And now we come over here to the table column
and we see here we will want to bind its value
to the Array Controller and its Arranged Objects Key.
So go ahead and save that and run.
Now here you see, you know, it's exactly the same as it was
before but that's a very good result, that's what we want.
We have eliminated code instead of just some simple
bindings in Interface Builder and this is working exactly
as it did before, but there's a
hidden benefit to this as well.
Here we'll come to where we have these images
stored and we'll drop some more images in here,
and we'll come back to our application and we
see the table view has been automatically updated
with the contents of that directory.
Spotlight is watching for notification of file
system changes, updates the NSMetaDataQuery results,
the NSArray Controller then takes that and pushes
that up to the table view all dynamically for us.
Cocoa bindings and Spotlight are some great features
we hope that you use them in your own applications.
Back to Chris now.
>> Chris: So an interesting thing there, there's a lot
of similar API for table views and dealing with that
but the Cocoa Bindings technology allows you to eliminate
a lot of glue code that would exist between your controller
and your model objects and you can basically stop writing
some of that boilerplate code, it's actually a very nifty
and very interesting way to be able to program
Once you've got all of this stuff hooked up you'll really
sometimes want to be able to integrate with the Mac.
Some developers write an iPhone app and you're
going to write a companion app for the Macintosh
and a lot of this applies both to just being able
to find both iPhones and Macintoshes on the network.
But Bonjour is a network service discovery protocol
you heard Simon Patience talk
about it a little bit at his keynote presentation yesterday.
You publish a service on the network and then you
can find those services and the Foundation API
for this is NSNetService known as NetService Browser.
It works the same way it does on the iPhone so if
you've been discovering other iPhones via Bonjour
on Wi-Fi you'll be able to discover other desktop computers
as well in the same network so a lot of the same code
that you're using there will come across as well.
Keyed archiving a very simple way to be
able to exchange data between the desktop
and the iPhone is the Keyed Archiver
and using the Keyed Archiver.
It's compatible between the phone and the desktop Macintosh
so that the data that you create the NSData that come
out of the Archiver you can just shoot right
down to the phone and it'll unpack on the phone.
You can customize the objects that come in and out
of it so if your model is a little bit different
in both places you'll be able to tweak that.
The nice thing about this is that
it's a very simple straightforward way
to be able to exchange smaller amounts of data.
Another higher level thing is Core Data.
If you've only been doing iPhone programming
Core Data's a very interesting technology.
It's basically an object persistence management framework.
Right, so you've got a whole bunch of objects they
have relationships to each other and you add something
to an array or you remove something from an array
those represent relationships between objects
and this manages the entire object graph and the persistence
of that object graph and it does just a fantastic job
of dealing with high volumes of objects,
hundreds of thousands of objects at a time.
It includes versioning of datastore so as you
make your data-set richer and you enhance objects
with attributes you'll be able to migrate that information
forward and it takes the same predicate format, basically,
you saw with NSMetaDataQuery and it uses those predicates
to do searches on the database and it abstracts a lot
of the SQL Light object relationship management stuff that
you've been doing by hand directly against the database
and it puts it right into a framework for you.
There are 2 talks about that this year.
Introduction to Core Data on the iPhone and if you haven't
used Core Data before this would be a fantastic talk for you
to go to and that's in the Marina, Tuesday at 5.
And What's New in Core Data talks about what's new
in Core Data for both the phone and the desktop
and that's in North Beach Wednesday at 10:30.
So once you've got all of this stuff together you're
not done yet there are a lot of things you can do
to be a really fantastic Macintosh application.
There are many, many frameworks that
enhance the user's experience in working
with your documents and working with the computer.
One of them is Spotlight, so we were a client of Spotlight
in Kevin's demo to be able to search the hard drives
that are connected to the machine in order to
determine what files meet the criteria for the search.
Your documents can participate in Spotlight as well, so in
a document-based application you'd write a Spotlight plug-in
that indexes your content and adds that to the
Spotlight database so when the user types something in
and your app is installed and its index document's written
by your app the user will see those documents appear
in the search results, so you can
participate in Spotlight as well.
Similarly, Quick Look, on your computers right now if you
hit the Spacebar on a JPG or and image or a Keynote doc
and anything like that that HUD window pops up and it has a
preview of the document and in that preview you can interact
with you can scroll through a PDF, you can look at
multiple images, you can scroll through a presentation
or look at all the sheets in a numbers document.
This is the Quick Look technology you would write a
plug-in for that and actually participate in the same thing
so when the user hits the Spacebar when one
of your documents is selected in
the Finder you get the same preview.
Boy that just looks like the Eye of Sauron that's just going
to bore you to death with his vacation pictures, doesn't it?
Here we were running through Mordor, right?
AppleScript, AppleScript is an absolutely
incredible technology on Mac OS X
and it has some really interesting characteristics.
You can publish your Object Graph and
commands that you can do to your Object Graph,
your model basically as an AppleScript Dictionary, nsDef
and that allows the user to write scripts against your app,
you know, create new window in front and add text to
that window or add an object to that window or an image,
things like that, and this allows you also to participate
with Automator and a number of other technologies
to have your application participate
in workflows that your users write.
So even applications that never knew anything
about each other you can actually string together workflows
using AppleScript and it's a great boon to your users
and if you participate in AppleScript it's
another big bonus for your Macintosh application.
Another big, big technology that we like to make a big deal
of, Mac OS X has some of the best accessibility behaviors
in an operating system so for users that are
visually impaired or who have other difficulties
in using a machine the accessibility frameworks allow
you to annotate your application with everything
that those users would need to be able to effectively
use the computer even if they can't see the screen.
On Mac Os X this means being able to
plug in an arbitrary Braille reader
and have that give it all the information
to the user right at their fingertips.
So accessibility is another thing that if
you're going to be writing a Mac application
or even your iPhone applications now on iPhone 3.0
you really shouldn't ignore because this is a big,
big feature that -- the kit does a lot for you free
but you can also enhance it with that experience.
So, please go out write your application, you know, use the
model code that you already have or write a new application
for the Macintosh using all of the
skills that you already know in order
to drive, you know, Xcode and all of those things.
So, Matt Drance is our iPhone and Mac
Application Frameworks Evangelist.
I got that wrong in my last talk so I had to say
that very carefully to make sure that I got it right.
His email address is MDrance@Apple.com
and there's a lot of documentation
at the Mac Dev Center, Developer@apple.com/mac.